.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT-DIFF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort-diff
.Nd compute ort configuration differences
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ort-diff
.Op Fl d
.Op Ar oldconfig...
.Fl f
.Op Ar config...
.Nm ort-diff
.Op Fl d
.Ar oldconfig
.Op Ar config
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Accepts
.Xr ort 5
.Ar config
and
.Ar oldconfig
files, the latter defaulting to standard input, and produces differences
between the two configurations.
.Pp
It has no arguments, but the new configuration is preceded by
.Fl f .
In a special case for simplicity, a single old and new configuration may
be specified together without
.Fl f .
Either
.Ar oldconfig
or
.Ar config
may be empty, and thus read from standard input, but not both.
.Pp
.Nm
outputs a series of statements indicating differences.
The format is not yet standardised.
.Pp
This tool is still experimental.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.\" .Sh EXAMPLES
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 5
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
