.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017--2021 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT-AUDIT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort-audit
.Nd audit ort role access
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ort-audit
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl r Ar role
.Op Ar config...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Accepts
.Xr ort 5
.Ar config
files, defaulting to standard input,
and generates an audit report on standard output.
Its arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl v
Instead of printing once whether a structure is reachable, print for
each query and path to the reachable structure.
.It Fl r Ar role
Audit the named
.Ar role .
.El
.Pp
By default, the
.Ar all
role is audited.
.Pp
Output consists of three space-separated columns.
The first column is the type of operation, the second is the component
accessable along with extra information, and the third is the location
in the configuration where the component was parsed.
.Pp
The types of operation are
.Cm count ,
.Cm delete ,
.Cm insert ,
.Cm iterate ,
.Cm list ,
.Cm read ,
.Cm readwrite ,
.Cm search ,
and
.Cm update .
All of these correspond to operations except for
.Cm read
and
.Cm readwrite ,
which refer to whether a structure is reachable through a query
.Pq Cm read ;
and if so
.Pq Cm readwrite ,
whether it may be exported.
If
.Fl v
is used, reachable structures are shown for each query and path possible.
.Pp
The component (and source) depends upon the operation:
.Bl -bullet
.It
If the operation is an insert, the component and source are the
structure and insert position.
.It
If an update or delete, it's the operation's structure, name, and
position.
If anonymous, a hyphen
.Sq \-
is shown instead of the name.
The structure and operation name are separated by a colon.
.It
For queries, the structure and name of the query (or a hyphen, if
anonymous) and position.
.It
For reachable structures, the structure name and position unless
.Fl v
is specified, in which case it's the structure name, the originating
query type and name, and the path to the structure along nested
structures, with each path component separated by a period.
If the structure is reachable at the query origin, the path is a hyphen.
The source is the query position.
.El
.Pp
The position is listed as the originating file, line, and column.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Consider the following
.Fa db.ort :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
roles {
        role foo;
        role bar;
};
struct baz {
        field id int rowid;
};
struct bar {
	field baz struct bazid;
	field bazid:baz.id int;
        field id int rowid;
        insert;
        iterate: name id;
        roles foo { insert; };
        roles bar { iterate id; };
};
.Ed
.Pp
When audited, this produces the following:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% ort-audit -r foo db.ort
insert      bar  db.ort:8:7
% ort-audit -vr bar db.ort
iterate     bar:id              db.ort:13:15
readwrite   bar:iterate:id:-    db.ort:13:15
readwrite   baz:iterate:id:baz  db.ort:13:15
.Ed
.Pp
From this, it's clear that the
.Qq foo
role has no access to the
.Qq baz
or
.Qq bar
structures at all, and can only insert.
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 5
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
