.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT-C-MANPAGE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort-c-manpage
.Nd generate C API documentation
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ort-c-manpage
.Op Fl jJ
.Op Ar config...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility accepts
.Xr ort 5
.Ar config
files, defaulting to standard input,
and generates C API documentation.
Its arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl j
Output
.Sx JSON export
function declaration documentation.
.It Fl J
Output
.Sx JSON import
function declaration documentation.
.El
.Pp
The output is in
.Xr mdoc 7 .
It is arranged into sub-sections beneath the
.Dv DESCRIPTION .
.Pp
The documentation begins with data structures (describing roles,
structures, enumerations, and bit-fields where applicable).
It continues with database input, which consists of queries, updates,
and deletes where applicable.
.Pp
If
.Fl J
is enabled, output continues with JSON input functions using the
built-in JSMN implementation.
If
.Fl j
is enabled, it continues with JSON output, which consists of the JSON
output using
.Xr kcgijson 3 .
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
To quickly browse the C API documentation for a given configuration on
.Xr mandoc 1
systems, simply run:
.Pp
.Dl ort-c-manpage db.ort | mandoc | less
.Pp
Or on systems using
.Xr groff 1
for manpage rendering:
.Pp
.Dl ort-c-manpage db.ort | groff -Tutf8 -mandoc -itk | less -R
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort-c-header 1 ,
.Xr ort-c-source 1 ,
.Xr kcgijson 3 ,
.Xr ort 5 ,
.Xr mdoc 7
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
