.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, 2018 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT-JSON 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort-json
.Nd generate JSON representation of configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ort-json
.Op Ar config...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Accepts
.Xr ort 5
.Ar config
files, defaulting to standard input, and generates a JSON representation
of the configuration to standard output.
.Nm
accepts no arguments.
.Pp
Parse errors, if any, are printed to standard error.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.Sh FILES
The
.Pa ort-json.ts
file, usually distributed in
.Pa /usr/local/share/ort ,
consists of a TypeScript namespace describing the output.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following shell snippet demonstrates validating JSON against the
TypeScript definitions, which are assumed to be in
.Pa /usr/local/share/ort .
The
.Xr ort 5
configuration is
.Pa db.ort ,
and the
.Pa jsonschema
and
.Pa jsonlint
utilities are assumed to be installed.
Translation from the TypeScript definitions to JSON schema are managed
by the
.Pa typescript-json-schema
utility installed via
.Xr npm 1 .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% npm init -y
% npm install typescript-json-schema
% node_modules/.bin/typescript-json-schema \e
> --strictNullChecks /usr/local/share/ort/ort-json.ts \e
> ort.ortConfig > ort-json.schema
% ort-json db.ort > db.json
% jsonlint db.json
% jsonschema -i db.json ort-json.schema
.Ed
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 5
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
