.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017--2019 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT-C-HEADER 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort-c-header
.Nd generate ort C API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ort-c-header
.Op Fl jJv
.Op Fl g Ar guard
.Op Fl N Ar db
.Op Ar config...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility accepts
.Xr ort 5
.Ar config
files, defaulting to standard input,
and generates a C API.
These declarations is usually defined by the output of
.Xr ort-c-source 1 .
Its arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl j
Output
.Sx JSON export
function declarations.
.It Fl J
Output
.Sx JSON import
function declarations.
.It Fl v
Output
.Sx Data validation
function and variable declarations.
.It Fl g Ar guard
Preprocessor guard for header re-inclusion.
Defaults to
.Ar DB_H .
This is not sanity-checked.
.It Fl N Ar bd
Disable production of output, which may be
.Ar b
and/or
.Ar d .
The
.Ar b
flag suppresses the foundational
.Sx Data structures
declarations, while
.Ar d
suppresses the
.Sx Database input .
This flag is used when creating multiple header files.
.It Fl s
This flag is retained only for backward compatibility.
.El
.Pp
By default, the
.Sx Database input
and
.Sx Data structures
declarations are output.
.Ss Data structures
The basis of the C API is a series of enumerations, structures, and
preprocessor macros that describe the data.
To include output files for data structures, specify:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <sys/queue.h> /* iff the config has lists */
#include <stdint.h>
.Ed
.Pp
Output begins with the definition of roles.
This only happens if roles are specified in
.Ar config ,
such as:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
roles {
  role user;
};
.Ed
.Pp
Each of these are produced as an enumeration (always called
.Vt enum ort_role ) ,
with the extra
.Va ROLE_none
and
.Va ROLE_default
produced for the empty and initial roles, respectively.
See the
.Sx Database input
section for details on role management.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
enum ort_role {
  ROLE_user,
  ROLE_none,
  ROLE_default
};
.Ed
.Pp
Next, an enumeration is generated for each
.Cm enum
with the name as given.
The enumeration is then given a series of values for each item in the
enumeration object.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
enum foo {
  item bar 0;
  item baz 1;
};
.Ed
.Pp
Output variables are prefixed with the capitalised enumeration name,
followed by an underscore, followed by the item name.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
enum foo {
  FOO_bar = 0,
  FOO_baz = 1
};
.Ed
.Pp
Bit-fields produce similar code, except that each bit-field value is
represented by the bit index and mask.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bits foo {
  item baz 1;
};
.Ed
.Pp
This produces an enumeration that describes the index of the bit
prefixed with
.Qq BITI ,
the underscore, followed by the uppercase name; and the mask when the
respective bit is set prefixed with
.Qq BITF ,
the underscore, and the uppercase name.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
enum foo {
  BITI_FOO_baz = 1,
  BITF_FOO_baz = (1U << 1)
};
.Ed
.Pp
Structures are the foundational data structure of the API.
They are named as defined in the configuration and consist of variables
mapped to
.Cm field
entries along with bookkeeping fields:
if a variable may be
.Cm null ,
an extra
.Vt int
variable prefixed with
.Qq has_
is defined as well; or if it is a
.Cm blob ,
an extra
.Vt size_t
variable suffixed with
.Qq _sz
is defined.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct company {
  field name text;
  field foo enum foo null;
  field id int rowid;
};
.Ed
.Pp
Text variables are NUL-terminated
.Vt "char *"
strings, blobs are
.Vt "void *" ,
integers are
.Vt int64_t ,
reals are
.Vt double ,
epoch values are
.Vt time_t ,
enumerations are as named, and nested structures (foreign key
references) are defined as structures of the given type.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct company {
  char *name;
  enum foo foo;
  int has_foo;
  int64_t id;
};
.Ed
.Pp
All structures are defined in order so that they need not be
forward-declared.
.Pp
If the structure consists of a
.Cm list
operation, a
.Xr TAILQ_ENTRY 3
named
.Va _entries
is produced in its output.
If roles are defined, each structure has a variable
.Va priv_store
of an opaque pointer type
.Vt "struct ort_store" .
This is used to keep track of the role in which the query function was
invoked.
.
.Ss Database input
Input functions define how the structures described in
.Sx Data structures
are pulled from the database.
These functions invoke
.Xr sqlbox 3
for handling the database itself, so the
.Fl l Ns Ar sqlbox
library is required for linking.
Depending on your operating system, you may need the following inclusion before
including the header file.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <stdint.h> /* int64_t... */
.Ed
.Pp
There are two functions,
.Fn db_open
and
.Fn db_close ,
that open and close the database, respectively.
There are also several transaction functions and, if applicable, a
function for managing roles.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li struct ort *db_open(const char *file)
Open a database named
.Fa file
and return a pointer.
Returns
.Dv NULL
on failure to allocate, open, or configure the database.
.It Li void db_close(struct ort *p)
Closes a database opened by
.Fn db_open .
Passing
.Dv NULL
is a noop.
.It Li void db_trans_commit(struct ort *p, size_t id)
Commit a transaction opened by
.Fn db_trans_open
with identifier
.Fa id .
If an error occurs, subsequent database access will cause the system to
.Xr exit 3 .
.It Li void db_trans_open(struct ort *p, size_t id, int mode)
Open a transaction with a unique identifier
.Fa id .
The identifier prevents recursive transactions and allows for
identifying open transactions on error.
If
.Fa mode
is zero, the transaction locks the database on first access with shared
locks (no writes allowed, reads allowed) on queries and unshared locks
(single writer, reads allowed) on modification.
If >0, the transaction immediately enters unshared lock mode.
If <0, the transaction locks exclusively, preventing all other
access.
Using >0 is the preferred way of creating database transactions.
If an error occurs, subsequent database access will cause the system to
.Xr exit 3 .
.It Li void db_trans_rollback(struct ort *p, size_t id)
Roll-back a transaction opened by
.Fn db_trans_open
with identifier
.Fa id .
If an error occurs, subsequent database access will cause the system to
.Xr exit 3 .
.It Li void db_role(struct ort *ctx, enum ort_role newrole)
If roles are enabled, move from the current role to
.Fa newrole .
If the role is the same as the current role, this does nothing.
Roles may only transition to ancestor roles, not descendant roles or
siblings, or any other non-ancestor roles.
The only exception is when leaving
.Dv ROLE_default
or entering
.Dv ROLE_none .
This does not return failure: on role violation, it invokes
.Xr abort 2 .
.It Li enum ort_role db_role_current(struct ort *ctx)
If roles are enabled, get the currently-assigned role.
If
.Fn db_role
hasn't yet been called, this will be
.Dv ROLE_default .
.It Li enum ort_role db_role_stored(struct ort_store *ctx)
If roles are enabled, get the role assigned to an object at the time of its
creation.
.El
.Pp
Each structure has a number of operations for operating on the
.Sx Data structures .
These are all stipulated as
.Cm delete ,
.Cm insert ,
.Cm iterate ,
.Cm list ,
.Cm search ,
and
.Cm update
statements in the configuration.
Let
.Qq foo
be the name of the exemplar structure.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li int db_foo_delete_xxxx(struct ort *p, ARGS)
Run the named
.Cm delete
function
.Qq xxxx .
The ARGS passed to this function are
the fields that constrain which rows are deleted.
Parameters are only specified for operations for binary-operator
constraints, i.e., those not checking for null status.
Returns non-zero on success, zero on constraint failure.
.It Li int db_foo_delete_by_yy_op(struct ort *p, ARGS)
Like
.Fn db_foo_delete_xxxx ,
but using an un-named
.Cm delete
statement constrained by
.Qq yy
with operation
.Qq op .
.It Li void db_foo_free(struct foo *p)
Frees a pointer returned by a unique search function.
If passed
.Dv NULL ,
this is a noop.
.It Li void db_foo_freeq(struct foo_q *p)
Frees a queue (and its members) created by a listing function.
This function is produced only if there are listing statements on a
given structure.
.It Li struct foo *db_foo_get_xxxx(struct ort *p, ARGS)
The
.Cm search
statement named
.Qq xxxx .
The function accepts variables for all binary-operator fields to check
(i.e., all except for those checking for null).
.It Li struct foo *db_foo_get_by_xxxx_op1_yy_zz_op2
Like
.Fn db_foo_get_xxxx ,
but for (possibly-nested) structures.
In the given example,
.Qq xxxx
is a field in the given structure with operation
.Qq op1
and
.Qq yy_zz
means a field
.Qq zz
in the nested structure
.Qq yy
with operation
.Qq op2 .
.It Li int64_t db_foo_insert(struct ort *p, ARGS)
Insert a row and return its
.Ft int64_t
identifier or
.Li \&-1
on constraint failure.
This accepts all native fields ARGS as parameters excluding
.Cm rowid ,
which is automatically set by the database.
If any fields are specified as
.Cm null ,
they are passed into this functions as pointers.
The null values must then be specified as
.Dv NULL
pointers.
This function is only generated if the
.Cm insert
statement is specified for the given structure.
.It Li void db_foo_iterate(struct ort *p, foo_cb cb, void *arg, ARGS)
Iterate over all rows.
.It Li void db_foo_iterate_xxxx(struct ort *p, foo_cb cb, void *arg, ARGS)
Like
.Fn db_foo_get_xxxx ,
but invoking a function callback
.Fa cb
passed
.Fa arg
within the active query for each retrieved result.
.It Li void db_foo_iterate_by_xxxx_op1_yy_zz_op2(struct ort *p, foo_cb cb, void *arg, ARGS)
Like
.Fn db_foo_get_by_xxxx_op1_yy_zz_op2 ,
but invoking a function callback for the retrieved results.
.It Li struct foo_q *db_foo_list(struct ort *p)
Allocate and fill a queue of all rows.
.It Li struct foo_q *db_foo_list_xxxx(struct ort *p, ARGS)
Like
.Fn db_foo_get_xxxx ,
but producing a queue of responses.
.It Li struct foo_q *db_foo_list_by_xxxx_op1_yy_zz_op2(struct ort *p, ARGS)
Like
.Fn db_foo_get_by_xxxx_op1_yy_zz_op2 ,
but producing a queue of responses.
.It Li int db_foo_update_xxxx(struct ort *p, ARGS)
Run the named update function
.Qq xxxx .
The update functions are specified with
.Cm update
statements.
The parameters passed to this function are first the fields to modify,
then the fields that constrain which rows are updated.
If any modified fields are specified as
.Cm null ,
they are passed into this functions as pointers.
Any null values must then be specified as
.Dv NULL
pointers.
Update fields are only specified for operations for binary-operator
constraints, i.e., those not checking for null status.
Returns non-zero on success, zero on constraint failure.
.It Li int db_foo_update_xx_mod_by_yy_op(struct ort *p, ARGS)
Like
.Fn db_foo_update_xxxx ,
but using an un-named update statement modifying
.Qq xx
with modifier
.Qq mod
constrained by
.Qq yy
with operation
.Qq op .
Either or both modifiers and constraints may be empty.
If modifiers are empty, all fields are modified by setting.
If constraints are empty, they and the preceding
.Qq by
are omitted.
.El
.Ss JSON export
These functions invoke
.Xr kcgijson 3
to manage output formats.
The header files for both
.Xr kcgijson 3
and
.Xr kcgi 3
must be stipulated.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <sys/types.h> /* kcgi(3) */
#include <stdarg.h> /* kcgi(3) */
#include <stdint.h> /* kcgi(3) */
#include <kcgi.h>
#include <kcgijson.h>
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li void json_foo_array(struct kjsonreq *r, const struct foo_q *q)
Print the list
.Fa q
of structures as a key-value pair where the key is the
structure name and the value is an array consisting of
.Fn json_foo_data
objects.
This is only produced if the structure has
.Cm list
queries stipulated.
.It Li void json_foo_data(struct kjsonreq *r, const struct foo *p)
Enumerate only the fields of the structure
.Fa p
in JSON dictionary format.
The key is the field name and the value is a string for text types,
decimal number for reals, integer for integers, and base64-encoded
string for blobs.
If a field is null, it is serialised as a null value.
Fields marked
.Cm noexport
are not included in the enumeration, nor are passwords.
.It Li void json_foo_iterate(const struct agent *, void *arg)
Print a
.Dq blank
object consisting only of the structure data (see
.Fn json_foo_data )
within JSON object braces.
The calling convention (passing a
.Vt "void *"
as the
.Vt "struct kjsonreq" )
makes for easy integration with iterate functions.
This is only produced if the structure has
.Cm iterate
queries stipulated.
.It Li void json_foo_obj(struct kjsonreq *r, const struct agent *p)
Print the entire structure
.Fa p
as a key-value pair where the key is the structure name and the value is
an object consisting of
.Fn json_foo_data .
.El
.Ss JSON import
Utility functions for parsing buffers into objects defined in a
.Xr ort 5
configuration.
Unlike the functions in
.Sx JSON export ,
these do not require any additional headers.
The following use
.Dq foo
as an example structure.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li int jsmn_init(jsmn_parser *p)
Initialise a parser.
This must be called each time before
.Fn jsmn_parse
is invoked.
.It Li int jsmn_parse(jsmn_parse *p, const char *buf, size_t sz, jsmntok_t *toks, unsigned int toksz)
Parse a buffer
.Fa buf
of length
.Fa sz
into a series of tokens
.Fa toks
of length
.Fa toksz .
Returns less than zero on failure or the number of tokens parsed.
If invoked with a
.Dv NULL
value for
.Fa toks ,
tokens are parsed but not filled in.
This is the usual practise for parsing an unknown set of objects: a set
of tokens may be allocated using the non-negative return value.
.It Li int jsmn_eq(const char *buf, const jsmntok_t *t, const char *s)
Test whether the current token
.Fa t
referencing buffer
.Fa buf
is a string equal (case sensitive) to
.Fa s .
.It Li int jsmn_foo(struct foo *p, const char *buf, const jsmntok_t *t, size_t toksz)
Parse an object starting at token
.Fa t
referencing buffer
.Fa buf
with
.Fa toksz
remaining tokens into
.Fa p .
Returns less than zero on allocation failure, zero on parse error
(malformed fields), or the number of tokens parsed.
The input structure should be zeroed prior to calling.
Regardless the return value, the resulting pointer should be passed to
.Fn jsmn_foo_free .
.It Li int jsmn_foo_array(struct foo **p, size_t *sz, const char *buf, const jsmntok_t *t, size_t toksz)
Like
.Fn jsmn_foo ,
but allocating and filling an array of structures.
The array must be freed with
.Fn jsmn_foo_free_array
regardless the return value.
.It Li void jsmn_foo_free_array(struct foo *p, size_t sz)
Free an array of structures, recursively clearing all nested data.
Does nothing if
.Fa p
is
.Dv NULL .
.It Li void jsmn_foo_clear(struct foo *p)
Recursively clears all nested data, not touching the pointer.
Does nothing if
.Fa p
is
.Dv NULL .
.El
.Pp
The parser writes the parse tree tokens into a linear array in infix
order.
Each node is either an object (consisting of string key and value
pairs), an array, a primitive, or a string.
To drive the parser, initialise a parse, parse the input (usually twice:
once to get the number of tokens, the second to fill in tokens),
recursively descend into the token stream.
The descent should occur for all objects and arrays.
.Ss Data validation
These functions invoke
.Xr kcgi 3
to perform basic type validation.
The following are required for including the produced functions.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <sys/types.h> /* kcgi(3) */
#include <stdarg.h> /* kcgi(3) */
#include <stdint.h> /* kcgi(3) */
#include <kcgi.h>
.Ed
.Pp
A full validation array is given for all fields, although these need not
be used by the calling application.
Given the same structure
.Qq foo ,
the following are generated:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li int valid_foo_xxxx(struct kpair *p)
Validate the field
.Qq xxxx
in the structure.
This should be used in place of raw validation functions such as
.Xr kvalid_int 3 .
The validation function will at least validate the type.
If limitation clauses are given to a field, those will also be emitted
within this function.
.Em Note :
structs are not validated.
.It Li enum valid_keys
An enumeration of all fields that accept validators.
The enumeration entries are
.Dv VALID_FOO_XXXX ,
where
.Qq XXXX
is the field name.
The last enumeration value is always
.Dv VALID__MAX .
.It Li const struct kvalid valid_keys[VALID__MAX]
A validation array for
.Xr khttp_parse 3 .
This uses the
.Fn valid_foo_xxxx
functions as described above and names corresponding HTML form entries
as
.Qq foo-xxxx ,
where again,
.Qq xxxx
is the field name.
.El
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
In the simplest case, put all C sources and headers (for validation,
database routines, and JSON output) into one pair of files.
Let
.Pa foo.ort
be the configuration file.
.Bd -literal
ort-c-header -jv foo.ort > db.h
ort-c-source -jv foo.ort > db.c
.Ed
.Pp
Breaking up into two header and source files: one for basic database
functions, the other for JSON output.
.Bd -literal
ort-c-header foo.ort > db.h
ort-c-header -g JSON_H -j -Nbd foo.ort > json.h
ort-c-source -h db.h > db.c
ort-c-source -j -Nb -Ibj -h db.h,json.h > json.c
.Ed
.Pp
In this more complicated snippet, the
.Pa json.h
file is created without structure or database information using
.Fl N , then
.Pa json.c
needs to include both database and JSON headers (in name,
.Fl h ,
and in the headers those stipulated in source,
.Fl I )
also while inhibiting database routine creation with
.Fl N .
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort-c-source 1 ,
.Xr kcgi 3 ,
.Xr kcgijson 3 ,
.Xr sqlbox 3 ,
.Xr ort 5
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
