.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, 2018 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT-SQLDIFF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort-sqldiff
.Nd produce ort SQL schema differences
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ort-sqldiff
.Op Fl d
.Op Ar oldconfig...
.Fl f
.Op Ar config...
.Nm ort-sqldiff
.Op Fl d
.Ar oldconfig
.Op Ar config
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Accepts
.Xr ort 5
.Ar config
and
.Ar oldconfig
files, the latter defaulting to standard input,
and produces SQL commands updating the old to new schema.
Its arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d
Allow some destructive changes.
.El
.Pp
The new configuration is preceded by
.Fl f .
In a special case for simplicity, a single old and new configuration may
be specified together without
.Fl f .
Either
.Ar oldconfig
or
.Ar config
may be empty, and thus read from standard input, but not both.
.Pp
.Nm
outputs a series of
.Cm CREATE TABLE
and
.Cm ALTER TABLE
SQL commands to update the configuration
.Ar oldconfig
to the new configuration
.Ar config .
With
.Fl d ,
.Cm DROP TABLE
SQL commands are also emitted.
(Dropped columns are noted, but not actually dropped.
This is a limitation of
.Xr sqlite3 1 . )
.Pp
The configuration files are considered incompatible if any of the
following are true:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
dropped enumerations
.It
dropped enumeration items
.It
changed enumeration item values
.It
dropped bitfields
.It
dropped bitfield items
.It
changed bitfield item values
.It
dropped structures
.It
dropped fields
.It
changed field types
.It
changed foreign key references
.It
changed SQL attributes
.Po
.Cm rowid ,
.Cm null ,
.Cm unique
.Pc
.It
added unique constraints
.El
.Pp
When
.Fl d
has been specified,
.Nm
the following destructive changes are allowed:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
dropped enumerations
.It
dropped enumeration items
.It
dropped bitfields
.It
dropped bitfield items
.It
dropped tables
.It
dropped table columns
.El
.Pp
If fields are added to a structure (columns to a table), the
configuration's
.Cm default
statement is used for generating an SQL default value.
If a
.Cm default
statement is not provided for columns
.Cm NOT NULL ,
the update will fail as-is and must be manually edited with default
values.
.Pp
It's good practise, but not enforced by
.Nm ,
to wrap the edit script in a transaction.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% ( echo "BEGIN EXCLUSIVE TRANSACTION ;" \e
    ort-sqldiff old.ort new.ort ; \e
    echo "COMMIT TRANSACTION ;" ) | sqlite3 foo.db
.Ed
.Pp
There is no additional processing in the database edit script: if the
script is run twice, it will attempt to create tables and modify columns
twice.
.Pp
The SQL generated is designed for
.Xr sqlite3 1 .
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
Let an existing configuration,
.Pa old.ort ,
consist of a
.Dq client
structure.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct client {
  field name text limit gt 0;
  field id int rowid;
};
.Ed
.Pp
A new configuration,
.Pa new.ort ,
augments this structure by adding a new field, and also adds a structure.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct client {
  field name text limit gt 0;
  field dob epoch;
  field id int rowid;
};
struct admin {
  field name text limit gt 0;
  field id int rowid;
};
.Ed
.Pp
This generates the following update script.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% ort-sqldiff old.ort new.ort
PRAGMA foreign_keys=ON;
CREATE TABLE admin (
  name TEXT NOT NULL,
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY
);
ALTER TABLE client ADD COLUMN dob INTEGER NOT NULL DEFAULT 0;
.Ed
.Pp
Since edit scripts are always non-destructive unless
.Fl d
was specified, the results may be piped directly into the database.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% ort-sqldiff old.ort new.ort | sqlite3 foo.db
.Ed
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort-sql 1 ,
.Xr sqlite3 1 ,
.Xr ort 5
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
