.\"	$OpenBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, 2018, 2021 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort
.Nd test ort configuration syntax
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ort
.Op Fl i
.Op Ar config...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility accepts an
.Xr ort 5
.Ar config ,
defaulting to standard input, and tests its syntax.
The configuration may be broken apart into several files.
Its arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl i
Output all case-insensitive names (e.g., field names, lookup sequences)
as lowercase instead of in their original case.
This is semantically equivalent to the input, but useful for
lexicographic comparison.
.It Ar config...
Zero or more configurations in the
.Xr ort 5
format.
.El
.Pp
Warnings and errors, if any, are printed to standard error.
On success, the configuration is reproduced on standard output.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.\" .Sh EXAMPLES
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 5
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
