.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT_LANG_XLIFF_UPDATE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort_lang_xliff_update
.Nd update translations from configuration
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libort-lang-xliff
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In ort.h
.In ort-lang-xliff.h
.Ft int
.Fo ort_lang_xliff_update
.Fa "const struct ort_lang_xliff *args"
.Fa "struct config *cfg"
.Fa "FILE *f"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Outputs XLIFF 1.2 file to
.Fa f
merging existing translations in
.Fa args
with new translations in
.Fa cfg .
The arguments recgnised in
.Fa args
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Va unsigned int flags
If the
.Dv ORT_LANG_XLIFF_COPY
mask is set and a translation is not provided for a given label, use the
default label instead of erroring out.
.It Va FILE **in
XLIFF 1.2 input files consisting of existing translations.
.It Va const char **fnames
The filenames (for informational purposes only) of files in
.Fa in .
.It Va size_t insz
The number of elements in
.Fa in
and
.Fa fnames .
.El
.Pp
.Nm
alters
.Fa cfg
in-place by possibly adding adding warning or error messages encountered during
processing.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Returns one of the following values:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Li <0
System failure from memory allocation, reading from input, or writing to
output.
.It Li 0
Syntax error parsing XLIFF files or translations missing.
.It Li >0
Success.
.El
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.\" .Sh EXIT STATUS
.\" For sections 1, 6, and 8 only.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A simple scenario of creating a configuration, parsing standard input,
linking, then joining with a translation file
.Pa fr.xlf .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct config *cfg;
struct ort_lang_xliff args;
FILE *f;
const char *fname = "fr.xlf";

if ((f = fopen(fname, "r")) == NULL)
  err(1, "%s", fname);

memset(&args, 0, sizeof(struct ort_lang_xliff));
args.in = &f;
args.fnames = &fname;
args.insz = 1;

if ((cfg = ort_config_alloc()) == NULL)
  err(1, NULL);

if (ort_parse_file(cfg, stdin, "<stdin>") &&
    ort_parse_close(cfg))
      ort_lang_xliff_update(&args, cfg, stdout);

ort_write_msg_file(stderr, &cfg.mq);
ort_config_free(cfg);
.Ed
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 3
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
