.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT_LANG_JSON 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort_lang_c_source
.Nd generate JavaScript (TypeScript) interface to ort data
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libort-lang-javascript
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In ort.h
.In ort-lang-javascript.h
.Ft int
.Fo ort_lang_javascript
.Fa "const struct ort_lang_javascript *args"
.Fa "const struct config *cfg"
.Fa "FILE *f"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Outputs a TypeScript file to
.Fa f
from the parsed configuration
.Fa cfg .
The output consists of a namespace containing classes to populate HTML5 DOM
trees.
The classes accept input usually produced by
.Xr ort_lang_c_header 3
or
.Xr ort_lang_nodejs 3 .
Parameters are in
.Fa args .
The values in
.Fa args
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Va const char *ext_privMethods
This string consists of classes and functions required by the produced
code.
It should be set to the contents of
.Pa ortPrivate.ts .
.It Va unsigned flags
Bit-field of output options.
.El
.Pp
The following output options are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Dv ORT_LANG_JS_EXPORT
Mark the top-level namespace as
.Dq export .
.El
.Pp
If
.Fa args
is
.Dv NULL ,
it is set to a structure initialised to zero.
This will inhibit printing of the
.Va ext_privMethods
data, which is probably not desired.
.Pp
The output is documented in typedoc.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Returns zero on failure, non-zero on success.
Failure only occurs with memory allocation errors or when writing to
.Fa f .
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ortPrivate.ts
Helper classes and functions that must be specified as
.Va ext_privMethods
in the configuration.
This is usually installed in
.Pa /usr/local/share/openradtool .
.El
.\" .Sh EXIT STATUS
.\" For sections 1, 6, and 8 only.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following emits formatting routines to standard output as read from
standard input.
It assumes that
.Va buf
has been initialised to the contents of
.Pa ortPrivate.ts .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct config *cfg;
struct ort_lang_javascript args;
FILE *f;

memset(&args, 0, sizeof(struct ort_lang_javascript));
args.ext_privMethods = buf;

if ((cfg = ort_config_alloc()) == NULL)
  err(1, NULL);
if (!ort_parse_file(cfg, stdin, "<stdin>"))
  errx(1, "ort_parse_file");
if (!ort_parse_close(cfg))
  errx(1, "ort_parse_close");
if (!ort_lang_javascript(&args, cfg, stdout))
  err(1, "ort_lang_javascript");

ort_config_free(cfg);
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, this could be converted into a string:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
char *buf = NULL;
size_t bufsz = 0;

/* Read and parse configuration as above... */

if ((stream = open_memstream(&buf, &bufsz)) == NULL)
  err(1, "open_memstream");
if (!ort_lang_javascript(&args, cfg, stream))
  err(1, "ort_lang_javascript");
fclose(stream);

/* Do something with buf of size bufsz. */

free(buf);
.Ed
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg-config 1 ,
.Xr ort 3
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
