.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT_MSG 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort_msg ,
.Nm ort_msgv
.Nd queue status message
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libort
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In ort.h
.Ft void
.Fo ort_msg
.Fa "struct config *cfg"
.Fa "enum msgtype type"
.Fa "int er"
.Fa "const struct pos *pos"
.Fa "const char *fmt"
.Fa "..."
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ort_msgv
.Fa "struct config *cfg"
.Fa "enum msgtype type"
.Fa "int er"
.Fa "const struct pos *pos"
.Fa "const char *fmt"
.Fa "va_list ap"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Queue a message attached to a configuration
.Fa cfg .
The message has a level of
.Fa type ,
which dictates how a caller should respond to the message.
The
.Fa er ,
if not zero, is interpreted as an
.Xr errno 2 .
The error is attached at position
.Fa pos ,
or unattached if
.Fa pos
is
.Dv NULL
or its
.Fa pos->fname
is
.Dv NULL .
If not
.Dv NULL ,
the contents of
.Fa pos->fname
are copied.
.Pp
Memory allocation failures are ignored.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.\" .Sh RETURN VALUES
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.\" .Sh EXIT STATUS
.\" For sections 1, 6, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh EXAMPLES
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 3 ,
.Xr ort_write_msg_file 3
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
