.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT_LANG_C_MANPAGE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort_lang_c_manpage
.Nd generate C API documentation from openradtool configuration
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libort-lang-c
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In ort.h
.In ort-lang-c.h
.Ft int
.Fo ort_lang_c_manpage
.Fa "const struct ort_lang_c *args"
.Fa "const struct config *cfg"
.Fa "FILE *f"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Outputs C API documentation from the parsed configuration
.Fa cfg
to
.Fa f
with the parameters in
.Fa args .
.Em This function interface is likely to change.
The arguments recgnised in
.Fa args
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Va unsigned int flags
The bit-field of components to output.
Only
.Dv ORT_LANG_C_JSON_JSMN
and
.Dv ORT_LANG_C_JSON_KCGI
are recognised.
.El
.Pp
By default,
.Fn ort_lang_c_manpage
behaves as if all argument values were zero.
The generated content is in standard
.Xr mdoc 7 .
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Returns zero on failure, non-zero on success.
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.\" .Sh EXIT STATUS
.\" For sections 1, 6, and 8 only.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A simple scenario of creating a configuration, parsing standard input,
linking, then performing some task is as follows.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct config *cfg;

if ((cfg = ort_config_alloc()) == NULL)
  err(1, NULL);
if (!ort_parse_file(cfg, stdin, "<stdin>"))
  errx(1, "failed parsing");
if (!ort_parse_close(cfg))
  errx(1, "failed linking");
if (!ort_lang_c_manpage(NULL, cfg, stdout))
  errx(1, "failed output");

ort_config_free(cfg);
.Ed
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 3 ,
.Xr ort_lang_c_header 3 ,
.Xr ort_lang_c_source 3
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
