.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT_PARSE_FILE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort_parse_file
.Nd parse openradtool configuration file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In ort.h
.Ft int
.Fo ort_parse_file
.Fa struct config *cfg
.Fa FILE *f
.Fa const char *fname
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Parse a configuration file into a
.Fa cfg
previously allocated with
.Xr ort_config_alloc 3 .
Should be called for each file collectively representing the configuration.
After the last file,
.Xr ort_parse_close 3
must be called.
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Returns zero if the parse failed, non-zero on success.
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.\" .Sh EXIT STATUS
.\" For sections 1, 6, and 8 only.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A simple scenario of creating a configuration, parsing standard input,
linking, then performing some task is as follows.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct config *cfg;

if ((cfg = ort_config_alloc()) == NULL)
  err(1, NULL);
if (!ort_parse_file(stdin, "<stdin>"))
  errx(1, "failed parsing");
if (!ort_parse_close(cfg))
  errx(1, "failed linking");

/* Do something with the configuration. */

ort_parse_free(cfg);
.Ed
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 3
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
