.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt ORT_WRITE_MSG_FILE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ort_write_msg_file
.Nd output openradtool messages
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libort
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In ort.h
.Ft int
.Fo ort_write_msg_file
.Fa "FILE *f"
.Fa "const struct msgq *mq"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Serialise a message queue
.Fa mq
to
.Fa f .
This does nothing if the queue is empty or
.Dv NULL .
Messages are emitted depending on their contents:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
fname:line:col: type: buf: strerror\en
fname:line:col: type: strerror\en
fname:line:col: type: buf\en
fname: type: ...\en
type: ...\en
.Ed
.\" The following requests should be uncommented and used where appropriate.
.\" .Sh CONTEXT
.\" For section 9 functions only.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Returns zero if errors occur writing to
.Fa f
or non-zero otherwise.
.\" For sections 2, 3, and 9 function return values only.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" For sections 1, 6, 7, and 8 only.
.\" .Sh FILES
.\" .Sh EXIT STATUS
.\" For sections 1, 6, and 8 only.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Create a configuration, then parse and link.
Emit the message queue.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct config *cfg;

if ((cfg = ort_config_alloc()) == NULL)
  err(1, NULL);
if (ort_parse_file(cfg, stdin, "<stdin>"))
  ort_parse_close(cfg))
ort_write_msg_file(stderr, &cfg->mq))
ort_config_free(cfg);
.Ed
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" For sections 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 printf/stderr messages only.
.\" .Sh ERRORS
.\" For sections 2, 3, 4, and 9 errno settings only.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ort 3
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" .Sh AUTHORS
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
